# OTML Weekly Briefing
## Climate conditions & rainfall outlook for Ok Tedi mine site

*`Updated: 11 Dec 2023`*

### Outline :
 - Climate background 
 - El Niño–Southern Oscillation analysis & forecast 
 - Indian Ocean Dipole analysis & forecast 
 - Madden–Julian Oscillation (MJO) analysis & forecast 
 - Rainfall forecasts

## SUMMARY 
- Seasonal Forecasts: The general consensus forecast for the JFM Season is leaning towards a likely above normal rainfall outlook for Ok Tedi and The Fly. December seems to be the last of the drier months in the outlook period.
- Monthly Forecasts: January forecasts show a slightly likely - likely (40 - 60%) chance of above-normal rainfall for Ok Tedi and The Fly. Feburay and March, predictions of above-normal rainfall are slightly likely at this time.
- Weekly Forecasts: For the first week(starting 11 Dec) rainfall is likely to fall Below Average. Second week also we see a likely chance of receiving Less than the Average rainfall. Below average rainfall can mean significant amounts of rainfall can still fall, just that averaged over the week, it is more likely to be below average than above average.
- Most climate models suggest a weak MJO event in the Western Pacifc. A moderate to strong MJO was present in the Maritime Continent before heading east. MJO over the West Pacific phase 6 is somewhat associated with average cloudliness over OK Tedi and Fly during period.
- El Nino is currently in place. Likely to continue into at least March. The wet season is set in effect which may mean that this drying influence could be broken by rains with the NW monsoon.

## SUMMARY TABLE
| MOST LIKELY RAINFALL SCENARIO | Week 1 (starting  11 December) ECMWF | Week 2 (starting 18 December) ECMWF | January 2023 (Next Month) ACCESS-S |
| ------ | ------ | ------ | ------ |
| Ok Tedi| Below Average [Likely - Very likely(70 - 90%)] | Below Average [Likely(70 - 90%)] | Above average [Slightly likely - Likely (40 - 60%)] |
| Upper Fly |  Below Average [Likely - Very likely(70 - 90%)]  | Below Average [Likely (70 - 80%)] | Below average [Slightly likely - Likely (40 - 60%)] |
| Middle Fly | Below Average [Likely (50 - 70%)] | Below Average [Likely(50 - 60%)] | Above average [Slightly likely - Likely (50 -60%)] |
| Lower Fly | Below Average [Likely (50 - 70%)] | Below average [Likely(50 - 60%)] | Above average [Slightly likely - Likely (50 - 70%)] |
