# OTML Weekly Briefing
## Climate conditions & rainfall outlook for Ok Tedi mine site

*`Updated: 27 Nov 2023`*

### Outline :
 - Climate background 
 - El Niño–Southern Oscillation analysis & forecast 
 - Indian Ocean Dipole analysis & forecast 
 - Madden–Julian Oscillation (MJO) analysis & forecast 
 - Rainfall forecasts

## SUMMARY 
- The general consensus forecast is leaning towards slightly above normal for Ok Tedi, Upper and Lower Fly. Forecast becomes challenging when three different seasonal predictions provide different perspectives.
- Weekly Forecasts: Looking at this week 7-day observed satellite rainfall, there was above average over the Fly. At this time, ECMWF generally has been doing better than ACCESS-S.
- December forecasts show a slightly likely(40 - 60%) chance of below-normal rainfall for Ok Tedi and Fly. In January towards February, predictions of above-normal rainfall are slightly likely(40 - 60%), mostly favoring Middle Fly region.
- The Madden-Julian Oscillation (MJO) is currently over the Indian Ocean. models forecast the MJO to reach us by the coming days. MJO over the region is often associated with above average rainfall for Fly.
- El Nino is underway. Climate models forecasts indicate some further warming of SSTs to the central and the eastern Pacific is likely and continues into at least April.
- The wet season is set in effect which may mean that this drying influence may be broken by rains with the NW monsoon. During the early half of the wet season, rainy periods will be less frequent/consistent.

## SUMMARY TABLE
| MOST LIKELY RAINFALL SCENARIO | Week 1 (starting  27 November) ECMWF | Week 2 (starting 04 December) ECMWF | December 2023 (Next Month) ACCESS-S |
| ------ | ------ | ------ | ------ |
| Ok Tedi| Above Average [ Likely (50 - 70%)] | Near Average [Slightly likely - Likely(40 - 60%)] | Below average [Slightly likely - Likely (40 - 60%)] |
| Upper Fly | Above Average [ Likely (50 - 70%)] | Near Average [Slightly likely - Likely(40 - 60%)] | Below average [Slightly likely - Likely (40 - 60%)] |
| Middle Fly | Above Average [ Likely (50 - 70%)] | Near Average [Slightly likely - Likely(40 - 60%)] | Below average [Slightly likely (<40 -50%)] |
| Lower Fly | Above Average [ Likely (50 - 70%)] | Near Average [Slightly likely - Likely(40 - 60%)] | Below average [Slightly likely - Likely (40 - 60%)] |
