# OTML Weekly Briefing
## Climate conditions & rainfall outlook for Ok Tedi mine site

*`Updated: 13 Nov 2023`*

### Outline :
 - Climate background 
 - El Niño–Southern Oscillation analysis & forecast 
 - Indian Ocean Dipole analysis & forecast 
 - Madden–Julian Oscillation (MJO) analysis & forecast 
 - Rainfall forecasts

## SUMMARY 
- The general consesus seasonal forecast from December to February for Ok Tedi and Fly River generally leans towards conditions ranging from Slightly Below Normal to Slightly Above Normal. Forecasts becomes challenging when three different seasonal predictions provide different perspectives.
- December forecast show a Slightly likely chance of Below Normal rainfall for Ok Tedi and Fly. In January and February, predictions of above normal rainfall are slightly likely, mostly favouring the Lower Fly region.
- The Madden-Julian Oscillation (MJO) is weak. Most models forecast a eastward propagation across the Western Pacific.
- El Nino is underway. Climate models forecasts indicate some further warming of SSTs to the central and the eastern Pacific is likely and continues into at least April.
- The wet season is set in effect which may mean that this drying influence may be broken by rains with the NW monsoon. During the early half of the wet season, rainy periods will be less frequent/consistent. We are forecasting that the combined effect of El Nino and positive IOD will become evident after April. This is inline with the maturing of the El Nino around December and its subsequent decay there after.

## SUMMARY TABLE
| MOST LIKELY RAINFALL SCENARIO | Week 1 (starting  13 November) | Week 2 (starting 20 November) | December 2023 (Next Month) |
| ------ | ------ | ------ | ------ |
| Ok Tedi| Below Average [ Very likely (> 80%)] | Below Average [Likely (60 - 70%)] | Below average [Slightly likely - Likely (50 - 80%)] |
| Upper Fly | Below Average [Very likely (> 80%)] | Below Average [Likely (60 -70%)] | Below average [Slightly likely - Likely (50 - 70%)] |
| Middle Fly | Below Average [Very likely (> 80%)] | Below Average [Slightly likely - Likely (50 - 70%)] | Below average [SLightly likely (40 -50%)] |
| Lower Fly | Below Average [Very likely (> 80%)] | Below Average [Slightly likely - Likely(50-80%)] | Below average [Slightly likely (40 - 50%)] |
